Rewrite of the configuration reference guide (#16496)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/config-extending-support.adoc

instance in a defined ordinal. This allows overriding values from other sources or falling back to other values.

image::config-sources.png[]

A custom Config Source requires an implementation of `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource` or
`org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSourceProvider`. Each implementation requires registration via
the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html[ServiceLoader] mechanism, either in
`META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource` or
`META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSourceProvider`.

=== Example

Consider a simple in-memory ConfigSource:

.org.acme.config.InMemoryConfigSource
[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource;

import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.Map;
import java.util.Set;

public class InMemoryConfigSource implements ConfigSource {
    private static final Map<String, String> configuration = new HashMap<>();

    static {
        configuration.put("my.prop", "1234");
    }

    @Override
    public int getOrdinal() {

>         return 275;

Author: Can add a comment explaining where that would be in comparison of the ENV and application.properties?

Author: (We may add a table somewhere actually) WDYT?

Author: Just saw the last sentence of the section. 
Should we add a table there?

Reviewer: Sure.

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Extending Configuration Support

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

[[custom-config-source]]
== Custom Config Sources

> It is possible to create a Custom Config Source as specified in

Reviewer 2: "Custom Config Source" isn't a proper noun, so this use of capitalization is nonstandard.

It should be `CustomConfigSource` if this is a type name, or "custom configuration source".

Reviewer 2: Also (minor) I would prefer "It's" here to "It is" which sounds stilted.

link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/configsources.asciidoc#custom-configsources-via-configsourceprovider[MicroProfile Config Source].

With a Custom Config Source it is possible to read additional configuration values and add them to the Config
instance in a defined ordinal. This allows overriding values from other sources or falling back to other values.

image::config-sources.png[]

A custom Config Source requires an implementation of `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource` or
`org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSourceProvider`. Each implementation requires registration via
the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html[ServiceLoader] mechanism, either in
`META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource` or
`META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSourceProvider`.

=== Example

> Consider a simple in-memory ConfigSource:

Reviewer 2: Need backpacks around `ConfigSource` .

    private static final Map<String, String> configuration = new HashMap<>();

    static {
        configuration.put("my.prop", "1234");
    }

    @Override
    public int getOrdinal() {
        return 275;
    }

    @Override
    public Set<String> getPropertyNames() {
        return configuration.keySet();
    }

    @Override
    public String getValue(final String propertyName) {
        return configuration.get(propertyName);
    }

    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return InMemoryConfigSource.class.getSimpleName();
    }
}
----

And registration in:

.META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource
[source,properties]
----
org.acme.config.InMemoryConfigSource
----

The `InMemoryConfigSource` will be ordered between the `.env` source, and the `application.properties` source due to
the `275` ordinal:

|===
|ConfigSource |Ordinal

|System Properties
|400

|Environment Variables from System
|300

|Environment Variables from `.env` file
|295

|InMemoryConfigSource
|275

|`application.properties` from `/config`
|260

|`application.properties` from application
|250

|`microprofile-config.properties` from application
|100
|===

> In this case, `my.prop` from `InMemoryConfigSource` will only be used if the Config Engine is unable to find a value

Reviewer 2: Same problem here: "Config Engine" is not a proper noun.

> in `System Properties`, `Environment Variables from System` and `Environment Variables from .env file` in this order.

Reviewer 2: Why are these phrases monospaced? They don't look like code fragments to me. Should they be links?

Reviewer: Yes. Let me add them.

[[config-source-factory]]
== Config Source Factory

Another way to create a `ConfigSource` is via the https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-config[SmallRye Config]

> `io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceFactory`. The difference between the SmallRye Config Factory and the standard way to

Reviewer 2: Same thing here: "Config Factory".

Reviewer 2: And "Factory" on the next line.

create a `ConfigSource` as specified in MicroProfile Config, is the Factory ability to provide a context with access to
the available configuration.

> Registration of a `io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceFactory` is done via the ServiceLoader mechanism by providing the

Reviewer 2: Should be `ServiceLoader` in monospace.

    @Override
    public Iterable<ConfigSource> getConfigSources(final ConfigSourceContext context) {
        final ConfigValue value = context.getValue("config.url");
        if (value == null || value.getValue() == null) {
            return Collections.emptyList();
        }

        try {
            return Collections.singletonList(new PropertiesConfigSource(new URL(value.getValue())));
        } catch (IOException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    }

    @Override
    public OptionalInt getPriority() {
        return OptionalInt.of(290);
    }
}
----

And registration in:

.META-INF/services/io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceFactory
[source,properties]
----
org.acme.config.URLConfigSourceFactory
----

By implementing `io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceFactory`, a list of `ConfigSource` may be provided via the
`Iterable<ConfigSource> getConfigSources(ConfigSourceContext context)` method. The `ConfigSourceFactory` may also
assign a priority by overriding the default method `OptionalInt getPriority()`. This is only used to sort multiple
factories during initialization. Once all the factories are initialized, the provided list of `ConfigSource` will use

> their own ordinal and sorted with all the other sources available in the `Config` instance.

Reviewer 2: This sentence doesn't seem to make sense.

When the Factory is initializing, the provided `ConfigSourceContext` may call the method

> `ConfigValue getValue(String name)`. This method lookups configuration names in all `ConfigSource` that were already

Reviewer 2: "lookups" is not a verb.

Should be "looks up".

Also, "in all the `ConfigSource`s" would read much better than "in all `ConfigSource`", it seems to me.

initialized by the `Config` instance, including sources with lower ordinals than the ones defined in the
`ConfigSourceFactory`. The `ConfigSource` list provided by a `ConfigSourceFactory` is not taken into considerations to
configure other sources produced by a lower priority `ConfigSourceFactory`.

[[custom-converters]]
== Custom Converters

> It is possible to create a Custom Converter type as specified by

Reviewer 2: Missing monospace.

link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/converters.asciidoc#adding-custom-converters[MicroProfile Config Custom Converters].

> A custom Converter requires an implementatin of `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter<T>`. Each implementation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A custom Converter requires an implementation of `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter<T>`. Each implementation
```

requires registration via the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html[ServiceLoader]

> mechanism, either in `META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter`. Consider:

Reviewer 3: This is weird. `Either... or...` or `or` but `either` alone here reads very weird.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

public class MicroProfileCustomValue {

    private final int number;

    public MicroProfileCustomValue(int number) {
        this.number = number;
    }

    public int getNumber() {
        return number;
    }
}
----

> The corresponding converter will look like the one below. Please note that the custom converter class must be `public`

Reviewer 2: "will look similar to the one below", or "will look something like the one below".

> and must have a `public` no-argument constructor. It also must not be `abstract`.

Reviewer 2: "It also must not be abstract" sounds clumsy. I would just write:

> Note that the custom converter class must be public, must have a public constructor with no arguments, and must not be abstract.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter;

public class MicroProfileCustomValueConverter implements Converter<MicroProfileCustomValue> {

    @Override
    public MicroProfileCustomValue convert(String value) {
        return new MicroProfileCustomValue(Integer.parseInt(value));
    }
}
----

> The custom configuration type converts the Config Source value automatically:

Reviewer 2: Same thing here.

[source,java]
----
@ConfigProperty(name = "configuration.value.name")
MicroProfileCustomValue value;
----

=== Converter priority

The `javax.annotation.Priority` annotation overrides the Converter priority and change converters precedence to fine

> tune converters execution order. By default, if no `@Priority` can be found on a converter, it's registered with a

Reviewer 2: I would change "can be found on" to "occurs on" or "is specified by".

> priority of `100` and all Quarkus core converters are registered with a priority of `200`. Consider:

Reviewer 3: I think we should say explicitly that to override a Quarkus converter, you need a 200+ priority (at least, that's what I understood).

Reviewer: Added as note.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import javax.annotation.Priority;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter;

@Priority(150)
public class MyCustomConverter implements Converter<MicroProfileCustomValue> {

    @Override
    public MicroProfileCustomValue convert(String value) {

        final int secretNumber;
        if (value.startsFrom("OBF:")) {
            secretNumber = Integer.parseInt(SecretDecoder.decode(value));
        } else {
            secretNumber = Integer.parseInt(value);
        }

        return new MicroProfileCustomValue(secretNumber);
    }
}
----

> Since it converts the same value type (namely `MicroProfileCustomValue`) and has a priority of `150`, it will be used

Reviewer 2: Get rid of "namely".

instead of a `MicroProfileCustomValueConverter` which has a default priority of `100`.

[[config-interceptors]]
== Config Interceptors ==

https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-config[SmallRye Config] provides an interceptor chain that hooks into the

> Config value resolution. This is useful to implement features like Property Substitution, Configuration Profiles, or

Reviewer 2: Lots of nonstandard capitalization here.

just Logging to find out where the config value was loaded from.

An interceptor can be created by implementing the `io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptor` interface. The
`io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptor` is able to intercept the resolution of a configuration name with the method
`ConfigValue getValue(ConfigSourceInterceptorContext context, String name)`. The `ConfigSourceInterceptorContext` is
used to proceed with the interceptor chain. The chain can be short-circuited by returning an instance of
`io.smallrye.config.ConfigValue`. The `ConfigValue` objects hold information about the key name, value, config source
origin and ordinal.

> NOTE: The Interceptor Chain is applied before any Conversion is performed on the configuration value.

Reviewer 2: More nonstandard capitalization.

> Registration of an interceptor in the interceptor chain is done via the `ServiceLoader` mechanism and provide the

Reviewer 3: `and provide` is weird here. It should at least be `provides` but even that looks a bit weird. It's more `you should provide` than anything else.

implementation classes in a `META-INF/services/io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptor` file.

Registration can also be done with a `io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptorFactory`, via the`ServiceLoader`

> mechanism and provide the implementation class in a `META-INF/services/io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptorFactory`

Reviewer 3: Same here.

(so it can be used to configure the interceptor and retrieve configuration values) and set the priority.

=== Example

.org.acme.config.LoggingConfigSourceInterceptor
[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import javax.annotation.Priority;

import io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptor;
import io.smallrye.config.ConfigLogging;

@Priority(Priorities.LIBRARY + 200)
public class LoggingConfigSourceInterceptor implements ConfigSourceInterceptor {
    private static final long serialVersionUID = 367246512037404779L;

    @Override
    public ConfigValue getValue(final ConfigSourceInterceptorContext context, final String name) {
        ConfigValue configValue = doLocked(() -> context.proceed(name));
        if (configValue != null) {
            ConfigLogging.log.lookup(configValue.getName(), configValue.getLocation(), configValue.getValue());
        } else {
            ConfigLogging.log.notFound(name);
        }
        return configValue;
    }
}
----

And registration in:

.META-INF/services/io.smallrye.config.ConfigSourceInterceptor
[source,properties]
----
org.acme.config.LoggingConfigSourceInterceptor
----

> The `LoggingConfigSourceInterceptor` logs lookups of configuration names in the provided logging platform. The log

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `LoggingConfigSourceInterceptor` logs looks up configuration names in the provided logging platform. The log
```
